= cqfd(1)
:doctype: manpage
:author: Gaël PORTAY
:email: gael.portay@gmail.com
:lang: en
:man manual: cqfd
:man source: dosh 7

== NAME

cqfd - a tool to wrap commands in controlled Docker containers using dosh.

== SYNOPSIS

*cqfd* [OPTIONS] [COMMAND] [COMMAND_OPTIONS] [COMMAND_ARGUMENTS]

== DESCRIPTION

*cqfd* provides a quick and convenient way to run commands in the current
directory, but within a Docker container defined in a per-project config file.

This becomes useful when building an application designed for another Linux
system, e.g. building an old embedded firmware that only works in an older
Linux distribution.

**Regular builds**

To build your project from the configured build environment with the default
build command as configured in _.cqfdrc_, use:

    $ cqfd

Alternatively, you may want to specify a custom command to be executed from
inside the build container.

    $ cqfd run make clean
    $ cqfd run "make linux-dirclean && make foobar-dirclean"

The _run_ command is broken in some situations, and it is then recommended to
use _exec_ for a single command, _shell -c_ for a command composed with shell
grammar, or _shell_ to run a shell script with or without arguments:

    $ cqfd exec make clean
    $ cqfd shell -c "make linux-dirclean && make foobar-dirclean"
    $ cqfd shell ./build.sh debug

When _cqfd_ is running, the current directory is mounted by Docker as a volume.
As a result, all the build artefacts generated inside the container are still
accessible in this directory after the container has been stopped and removed.

**Release**

The _release_ command behaves exactly like _run_, but creates a release tarball
for your project additionally. The release files (as specified in your
_.cqfdrc_) will be included inside the release archive.

    $ cqfd release

The resulting release file is then called according to the archive template,
which defaults to _%Po-%Pn.tar.xz_.

**Flavors**

Flavors are used to create alternate build scenarios. For example, to use
another container or another build command.

== OPTIONS

**-f FILE**::
	Use file as config file (default _.cqfdrc_).

**-d DIR**::
	Use directory as cqfd directory (default _.cqfd_).

**-C DIR**::
	Use the specified working directory.

**-b STRING**::
	Target a specific build flavor.

**-q**::
	Turn on quiet mode.

**-v** or **--version**::
	Show version.

**-h** or **--help**::
	Show this help text.

== COMMANDS

**init**::
	Initialize project build container.

**exec cmd [args]**::
	Run argument(s) inside build container.

**flavors**::
	List flavors from config file to stdout.

**run [command_string]**::
	Run argument(s) inside build container.

**release [command_string]**::
	Run argument(s) and release software.

**shell [sh_arguments]**::
	Run shell command inside build container.

**help**::
	Show this help text.

By default, the _run_ command is assumed, with the default command string
configured in your _.cqfdrc_ (see build.command).

Command options for run:

**-c <command_arguments>**::
	Append command arguments to the default command string.

== ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

The following environment variables are supported by cqfd to provide the user
with extra flexibility during his day-to-day development tasks:

**CQFD_DOCKER**::
	Program used to invoke _docker_ client.

**CQFD_EXTRA_RUN_ARGS**::
	A space-separated list of additional docker-run options to be append to
	the starting container. Format is the same as (and passed to)
	docker-run’s options. See 'docker run --help'.

**CQFD_EXTRA_BUILD_ARGS**::
	A space-separated list of additional docker-build options to be append
	to the building image. Format is the same as (and passed to)
	docker-build’s options.  See 'docker build --help'.

**CQFD_NO_SSH_CONFIG**::
	Set to _true_ to disable forwarding the global _/etc/ssh_
	configurations to the container. This may be required if the host's
	_ssh_ configuration is not compatible with the _ssh_ version within the
	container.

**CQFD_NO_USER_SSH_CONFIG**::
	Set to _true_ to disable forwarding the user's _~/.ssh_ configuration
	to the container.

**CQFD_NO_USER_GIT_CONFIG**::
	Set to _true_ to disable forwarding the user's _~/.gitconfig_
	configuration to the container.

**CQFD_NO_SSH_AUTH_SOCK**::
	Set to _true_ to disable forwarding the SSH authentication socket to
	the container.

**CQFD_BIND_DOCKER_SOCK**::
	Set to _true_ to enable forwarding the docker socket to the container.

**CQFD_DOCKER_GID**::
	The gid of the docker group in host to map to the cqfd group in the
	container.

**CQFD_SHELL**::
	The shell to be launched, by default _/bin/sh_.

== FILES

**.cqfd**::
	The cqfd directory.

**.cqfdrc**::
	The cqfd configuration file.

== EXAMPLES

Appending to the build command

The _-c_ option set immediately after the command run allows appending the
command of a cqfd run for temporary developments.

	$ cqfd -b centos7 run -c "clean"
	$ cqfd -b centos7 run -c "TRACING=1"

Running a shell in the container

You can use the _shell_ command to quickly pop a shell in your defined
container. The shell to be launched (default _/bin/sh_) can be customized using
the _CQFD_SHELL_ environment variable.

	fred@host:~/project$ cqfd shell
	fred@container:~/project$

Use cqfd as an interpreter for shell script

You can use the _shell_ command to write a shell script and run it in your
defined container.

	fred@host:~/project$ cat get-container-pretty-name.sh
	#!/usr/bin/env -S cqfd shell
	if ! test -e /.dockerenv; then
		exit 1
	fi
	source /etc/os-release
	echo "$PRETTY_NAME"
	fred@host:~/projet$ ./get-container-pretty-name.sh 
	Debian GNU/Linux 12 (bookworm)

Use cqfd as a standard shell for binaries

You can even use the _shell_ command to use it as a standard _$SHELL_ so
binaries honoring that variable run shell commands in your defined container.

	fred@host:~/project$ make SHELL="cqfd shell"
	Available make targets:
	   help:      This help message
	   install:   Install script, doc and resources
	   uninstall: Remove script, doc and resources
	   tests:     Run functional tests

== PATCHES

Submit patches at *https://github.com/gportay/dosh/pulls*

== BUGS

Report bugs at *https://github.com/gportay/dosh/issues*

== AUTHOR

Written by Gaël PORTAY *gael.portay@gmail.com*

== COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2024-2025 Gaël PORTAY

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation, either version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

== TRIVIA

CQFD stands for "ce qu'il fallait Dockeriser", French for "what needed to be
Dockerized".

== SEE ALSO

docker-build(1), docker-run(1), dosh(1), cqfdrc(5)
